Add Go metrics (#3235)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/go/manual.md

  values, such as room temperature
- UpDownCounter, a synchronous instrument which supports increments and
  decrements, such as number of active requests
- Asynchronous UpDownCounter, an asynchronous instrument which supports
  increments and decrements

For more on synchronous and asynchronous instruments, and which kind is best
suited for your use case, see
[Supplementary Guidelines](/docs/specs/otel/metrics/supplementary-guidelines/).

If a `MeterProvider` is not created either by an instrumentation library or
manually, the OpenTelemetry Metrics API will use a no-op implementation and fail
to generate data.

Here you can find more detailed package documentation for:

- Metrics API: [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric`][]
- Metrics SDK: [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/metric`][]

### Initialize Metrics

{{% alert color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, skip this step.
{{% /alert %}}

To enable [metrics](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/) in your app, you'll need to
have an initialized
[`MeterProvider`](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/#meter-provider) that will let
you create a [`Meter`](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/#meter).

> If a `MeterProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for metrics will use
> a no-op implementation and fail to generate data. Therefore, you have modify the
> source code to include the SDK initialization code using [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel`][],
> [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/metric`][], [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/resource`][],
> [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/exporters/stdout/stdoutmetric`][] packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `MeterProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for metrics will use
a no-op implementation and fail to generate data. Therefore, you have modify the
source code to include the SDK initialization code using the [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel`][],
[`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/metric`][], [`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/resource`][], and
[`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/exporters/stdout/stdoutmetric`][] packages.
```

Reviewer: Recommend pulling these out into bullet points, actually.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/b977a5d68b51cd7e21c55306deaacc862d4b7997

	otel.SetMeterProvider(meterProvider)

	// Handle shutdown properly so nothing leaks.
	defer func() {
		if err := meterProvider.Shutdown(context.Background()); err != nil {
			log.Println(err)
		}
	}()
}

func newResource() (*resource.Resource, error) {
	return resource.Merge(resource.Default(),
		resource.NewWithAttributes(semconv.SchemaURL,
			semconv.ServiceName("dice"),
			semconv.ServiceVersion("0.1.0"),
		))
}

func newMeterProvider(res *resource.Resource) (*metric.MeterProvider, error) {
	metricExporter, err := stdoutmetric.New()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	meterProvider := metric.NewMeterProvider(
		metric.WithResource(res),
		metric.WithReader(metric.NewPeriodicReader(metricExporter,
			// Default is 1m. Set to 3s for demonstrative purposes.
			metric.WithInterval(3*time.Second))),
	)
	return meterProvider, nil
}
```

Now that a `MeterProvider` is configured, you can acquire a `Meter`.

### Acquiring a Meter

Anywhere in your application where you have manually instrumented code you can
call [`otel.Meter`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel#Meter) to acquire
a meter. For example:

```go
import "go.opentelemetry.io/otel"

> var meter = otel.Meter("my-service-meter")

Reviewer: In the tracing manual instrumentation we don't do this (using just the API to acquire the tracer). I wrote those docs ages ago, though, and they were approved then but it's maybe worth re-addressing in a separate PR. What do you think? I'll submit that PR separately.

Author: In "Getting a Tracer" section we probably suggest doing to much and it should be splitted into something like "Initialize Tracing" and "Aquire a Tracer". For sure it should be in a seperate PR. I already seen some things in "tracing" sections that should be probably changed/improved but I want this PR to only focus on translating the "metrics" from JS to Go. Then I also want to improve the "Getting Started" for Go. After these two PRs are merged, I think it would be easier to consolidate Tracing and Metrics docs. Maybe we could even change the code snippets so that they refer somehow to the "Roll Dice" service?

Asynchronous instruments are useful in several circumstances, such as:

- When updating a counter is not computationally cheap, and thus you don't want
  the currently executing thread to have to wait for that measurement
- Observations need to happen at frequencies unrelated to program execution
  (i.e., they cannot be accurately measured when tied to a request lifecycle)
- There is no value from knowing the precise timestamp of increments

In cases like these, it's often better to observe a cumulative value directly,
rather than aggregate a series of deltas in post-processing (the synchronous
example).

### Using Counters

Counters can by used to measure a non-negative, increasing value.

```go
counter, err := meter.Int64Counter("events.counter")
if err != nil {
	panic(err)
}

// ...

counter.Add(context.Background(), 1)
```

### Using UpDown Counters

UpDown counters can increment and decrement, allowing you to observe a
cumulative value that goes up or down.

```go
counter, err := meter.Int64UpDownCounter("events.counter")
if err != nil {
	panic(err)
}

// ...

counter.Add(context.Background(), 1)

// ...

counter.Add(context.Background(), -1)
```

> ### Using Histograms

Author: Stop reviewing here 😉

## Metrics

> To start [metrics](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics), you'll need to have an

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/e78fbbabfec8e7ae882663ce02a1604b101aa3f1

> initialized `MeterProvider` that lets you create a `Meter`. `Meter`s let you

Author: `an` is in previous line.

> create `Instrument`s that you can use to create different kinds of metrics.

Author: I think that your proposal adds passive voice. But I may be wrong.

OpenTelemetry Go currently supports the following `Instrument`s:

> - Counter, a synchronous instrument which supports non-negative increments

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/e78fbbabfec8e7ae882663ce02a1604b101aa3f1

> - Asynchronous Counter, a asynchronous instrument which supports non-negative

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/e78fbbabfec8e7ae882663ce02a1604b101aa3f1

acquire a meter. For example:

```go
import "go.opentelemetry.io/otel"

var meter = otel.Meter("my-service-meter")
```

### Synchronous and asynchronous instruments

OpenTelemetry instruments are either synchronous or asynchronous (observable).

Synchronous instruments take a measurement when they are called. The measurement
is done as another call during program execution, just like any other function
call. Periodically, the aggregation of these measurements is exported by a
configured exporter. Because measurements are decoupled from exporting values,
an export cycle may contain zero or multiple aggregated measurements.

Asynchronous instruments, on the other hand, provide a measurement at the
request of the SDK. When the SDK exports, a callback that was provided to the
instrument on creation is invoked. This callback provides the SDK with a
measurement that is immediately exported. All measurements on asynchronous
instruments are performed once per export cycle.

Asynchronous instruments are useful in several circumstances, such as:

- When updating a counter is not computationally cheap, and thus you don't want

>   the currently executing thread to have to wait for that measurement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the current executing thread to wait for the measurement
```

- Observations need to happen at frequencies unrelated to program execution
  (i.e., they cannot be accurately measured when tied to a request lifecycle)

> - There is no value from knowing the precise timestamp of increments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There is no known timestamp for a measurement value
```

In cases like these, it's often better to observe a cumulative value directly,
rather than aggregate a series of deltas in post-processing (the synchronous
example).

### Using Counters

> Counters can by used to measure a non-negative, increasing value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Counters can be used to measure a non-negative, increasing value.
```

> For example, here's how you might report a number of calls for an HTTP handler:

Reviewer 2: nit

```suggestion
For example, here's how you might report several calls for an HTTP handler:
```

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/df79ee2a0cb5a74dda9167a9adfd55e7ece7c34e

```go
import (
	"net/http"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

func init() {
	apiCounter, err := meter.Int64UpDownCounter(
		"api.counter",
		metric.WithDescription("Number of API calls."),
		metric.WithUnit("{call}"),
	)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	http.HandleFunc("/", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		apiCounter.Add(r.Context(), 1)

		// do some work in an API call
	})
}
```

### Using UpDown Counters

UpDown counters can increment and decrement, allowing you to observe a
cumulative value that goes up or down.

> For example, here's how you might report a number of items of some collection:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, here's how you might report several items of some collection:
```

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3235/commits/df79ee2a0cb5a74dda9167a9adfd55e7ece7c34e

		panic(err)
	}
	http.HandleFunc("/", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		start := time.Now()

		// do some work in an API call

		duration := time.Since(start)
		histogram.Record(r.Context(), duration.Seconds())
	})
}
```

### Using Observable (Async) Counters

Observable counters can be used to measure an additive, non-negative,
monotonically increasing value.

For example, here's how you might report time since the application started:

```go
import (
	"context"
	"time"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

func init() {
	start := time.Now()
	if _, err := meter.Float64ObservableCounter(
		"uptime",
		metric.WithDescription("The duration since the application started."),
		metric.WithUnit("s"),
		metric.WithFloat64Callback(func(_ context.Context, o metric.Float64Observer) error {
			o.Observe(float64(time.Since(start).Seconds()))
			return nil
		}),
	); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
```

### Using Observable (Async) UpDown Counters

Observable UpDown counters can increment and decrement, allowing you to measure
an additive, non-negative, non-monotonically increasing cumulative value.

For example, here's how you might report some database metrics:

> ```js

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```go
```

import (
	"context"
	"database/sql"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

> // registerDBMetrics registers asynchronous metics for the provided db.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// registerDBMetrics registers asynchronous metrics for the provided db.
```

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/metric"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/resource"
	semconv "go.opentelemetry.io/otel/semconv/v1.21.0"
)

func main() {
	res, err := newResource()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	meterProvider, err := newMeterProvider(res)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	// Set the global meter provider.
	otel.SetMeterProvider(meterProvider)

	// Handle shutdown properly so nothing leaks.
	defer func() {
		if err := meterProvider.Shutdown(context.Background()); err != nil {
			log.Println(err)
		}
	}()
}

func newResource() (*resource.Resource, error) {
	return resource.Merge(resource.Default(),
		resource.NewWithAttributes(semconv.SchemaURL,
			semconv.ServiceName("dice"),
			semconv.ServiceVersion("0.1.0"),
		))
}

func newMeterProvider(res *resource.Resource) (*metric.MeterProvider, error) {
	metricExporter, err := stdoutmetric.New()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	meterProvider := metric.NewMeterProvider(
		metric.WithResource(res),
		metric.WithReader(metric.NewPeriodicReader(metricExporter,
			// Default is 1m. Set to 3s for demonstrative purposes.
			metric.WithInterval(3*time.Second))),
	)
	return meterProvider, nil
}
```

> Now that a `MeterProvider` is configured, you can acquire a `Meter`.

Reviewer 3: This example only uses stdout, which works but is limited. How about linking to the prometheus (and once stable and added, the otel-collector) examples in the Go repository?

Author: This is for sake of consistency with JavaScript docs. I also noticed that other "getting started" docs also start with console exporters.

Asynchronous instruments, on the other hand, provide a measurement at the
request of the SDK. When the SDK exports, a callback that was provided to the
instrument on creation is invoked. This callback provides the SDK with a
measurement that is immediately exported. All measurements on asynchronous
instruments are performed once per export cycle.

Asynchronous instruments are useful in several circumstances, such as:

- When updating a counter is not computationally cheap, and you don't want the
  current executing thread to wait for the measurement
- Observations need to happen at frequencies unrelated to program execution
  (i.e., they cannot be accurately measured when tied to a request lifecycle)
- There is no known timestamp for a measurement value

In cases like these, it's often better to observe a cumulative value directly,
rather than aggregate a series of deltas in post-processing (the synchronous
example).

### Using Counters

Counters can be used to measure a non-negative, increasing value.

For example, here's how you might report the number of calls for an HTTP
handler:

```go
import (
	"net/http"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

func init() {

> 	apiCounter, err := meter.Int64UpDownCounter(

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	apiCounter, err := meter.Int64Counter(
```

		metric.WithDescription("The time it took to obtain an open connection from the pool."),
		metric.WithUnit("ms"),
	)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	reg, err := meter.RegisterCallback(
		func(_ context.Context, o metric.Observer) error {
			stats := db.Stats()
			o.ObserveInt64(max, int64(stats.MaxOpenConnections))
			o.ObserveInt64(waitTime, int64(stats.WaitDuration))
			return nil
		},
		max,
		waitTime,
	)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	return reg, nil
}
```

### Using Observable (Async) Gauges

Observable Gauges should be used to measure non-additive values.

For example, here's how you might report memory usage of the heap objects used
in application:

```go
import (
	"context"
	"runtime"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

func init() {
	if _, err := meter.Int64ObservableGauge(
		"memory.heap",
		metric.WithDescription(
			"Memory usage of the allocated heap objects.",
		),
		metric.WithUnit("By"),
		metric.WithInt64Callback(func(_ context.Context, o metric.Int64Observer) error {
			var m runtime.MemStats
			runtime.ReadMemStats(&m)
			o.Observe(int64(m.HeapAlloc))
			return nil
		}),
	); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
```

### Adding attributes

> You can add Attributes to using

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can add Attributes by using the
```

[`WithAttributeSet`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric#WithAttributeSet)
or
[`WithAttributes`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric#WithAttributes)

> option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
options.
```
